# Java Programming Language
Java notes compiled in 
  [markdown language](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/)
1. Introduction
2. Java syntax & semantics
3. Java program structure
4. Compilation & Execution of Java program

## Introduction to Java.
Java programming language is a high-level  Object-oriented programming language(OOP) that was developed by James Gosling along with Mike Sheridan and Patrick Naughton at **Sun Microsystems** in the early 1990s.

The java latest version is **Java SE 23**(as of Sept 2024)

* Oracle provides different editions of the Java platform, namely:
1. Java SE([Standard Edition](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/))
2. Java EE([Enterprise Edition](https://jakarta.ee/))

### Java Standard Edition
Java SE is the core version of Java that provides the basic functionality needed for developing general-purpose applications. It includes the essential libraries and tools for building desktop and standalone applications, including: Core libraries (eg, I/O, networking), Java Virtual Machine(JVM), Tools (such as javac and java debugger)
It is typically used for Desktop applications (including GUI-based programs), Command-line tools, small-scale applications, and Client-side applications.
### Java Enterprise Edition
* Java EE is a set of specifications built on top of Java SE, designed for building large-scale, multi-tiered, distributed enterprise applications.
* Java EE provides a rich set of APIs and tools for developers who need to create more complex, scalable, and secure systems such as Servlets, Java Persistence API, Java Message Service, and JavaMail.

It is typically used in Microservices, Distributed systems, and Enterprise applications.

Here are the general applications of the Java programming language
- Mobile applications
- Desktop applications
- Web applications
- Web servers and application servers
- Game development 
- Database connection
- Cloud-based applications
* [Significance of Java Programming Language](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/advantages-and-disadvantages-of-java/?ref=ml_lbp)

### Terminologies used in Java
1. *Java source code*:
  This refers to the human-readable instructions written in the Java programming language, typically stored in files with a (.java extension.
2. *Java bytecode*:
  This is the intermediate representation of Java source code that is generated by the Java compiler when you compile **.java**. This bytecode is stored in a **.class** file extension.
3. *Javac*:
  This is the Java programming language compiler that is used to compile Java source code into bytecode.

4. *Java Development Kit(JDK)*:
   Is a complete software development kit that is used to develop Java applications. It includes the necessary components that are required for Java programming language, such as Java Runtime Environment (JRE), 
  Development tools like javac and javadoc, as well as libraries like **java.lang, java.util**.

5. *JRE (Java Runtime Environment)*:
 is a subset of the JDK and is required to run Java applications.
- It includes:- JVM (Java Virtual Machine), Core libraries (The essential Java class libraries, such as the java.lang and java.util packages, are included in the JRE).
- In short, the JRE is for running Java applications. If you're only interested in running Java programs (not developing them), you only need the JRE.

6. *Java Virtual Machine(JVM)*:
Is  the part of the Java runtime environment that is responsible for executing Java bytecode.

7. *Package*:
Is the namespace for organizing classes and interfaces. eg, java.util, com.mycompany.app

8. *Library*:
- A library is a collection of pre-written code, functions, or classes that can be used in your project.
- Libraries help developers by providing reusable code, thus saving time and effort. Eg.lava.io, Swing

9. *Framework*
- It is a set of tools, libraries, and best practices that provide a foundation for developers to build applications. Frameworks often follow certain architectural patterns (like MVC).
- A framework is a pre-built collection of classes, libraries, tools, and conventions that provide a structured foundation to support the development of Java applications.
- Examples: Spring, Hibernate


## Java Syntax and Semantics
1. ### **Syntax**
- Syntax refers to the rules that define the structure of valid Java programs.
- It governs how you write statements, expressions, classes, methods,etc., to ensure the program can be interpreted by the Java compiler.
- Syntax defines how the code must be written(structure).

### Basic rules of Java syntax
- *Case senstivity*:Java is case-senstive meaning that **Variable** and **variable** are treated as two different identifiers.
- *Statements*: A Java statementgenerally ends with a semicolon(;)
- *Whitespace*: Whitespace(spaces, tabs, newlines) is ignored by the compiler, but it is used to separate tokens(identifiers, operators,etc).
*Identifiers*: An identifier is a name given to variables, methods, classes, etc. It must start with a letter(a-z,A-Z), dollar sign($), or underscore(_), followed by letters, numbers
- *Comments*: Java supports single-line comments(//) and multi-line comments(/**/).

2. ### **Semantics**
- Semantics refers to the meaning behind syntax and how Java constructs and operations are interpreted during execution. While syntax focuses on how something is written, semantics concerns what it does.

- Semantics defines what the code actually does when executed, including variable scope, type behavior, and runtime behavior.

**For example:**
Variables- Java variables must be declared with the type(e.g, String, int, float), and they hold data.
```java
int a = 43;
String name ="Peter";

```
Semantics: **a** is an **integer** variable holding the value 43, and **name** is a **String** holding **Peter**.

## Java program structure
A Java program typically includes several components such as imports, classes, methods, and statements. Here is the basic structure of a simple Java program:

a. **Package declaration(optional)**
It can begin with a package declaration, which helps organize the code into different namespaces. This is optional and depends on how your code is structured in different directories. eg, package mypackage;

b. **Import statements(optional)**
You can import other classes or libraries that you need for your program. If you're using classes from Java's standard library or external libraries, you'll use the import keyword.
eg, import java.util.Scanner;

c. **Class declaration**
The class is a blueprint for creating objects. The class name must match the filename (e.g., if the class is Main, the file must be named Main.java).
Eg.
```java
public class Main{
  //class body
}
```
d. **Main method**
The entry point of any Java program is the main method. The program execution starts here. The method signature must always be:-
```java
public static void main(String[] args){
  //Method body
}
```
- **public**- It means the method is accessible from anywhere.
- **static** - It means the method can be called without creating an instance of the class.
- **void** - It means the method doesn't return any value.
- **String[] args** - This is an array of command-line arguments passed to the program.

e.  **Statements and logic**
Inside the main method, you write your program's logic, such as variable declarations, conditionals, loops, and method calls.

**Here is a simple basic Java program that prints"Hello, World!" to the console:**
```java
public class HelloWorld{
  public static void main(String[] args){
    System.out.println("Hello, World!");
  }
}
```
**Explanation**
1. public class HelloWorld{...}
- This is the definition of a Java class named **HelloWorld**.
- In Java, every application must have at least one class, and it is conventionally named the same as the file(in this case, *HelloWorld.java*).

2. public static void main(String[] args){..}
- This is the entry point of the program. The *main* method is where the execution of the program begins.
- **public**: This means that the method can be accesed from anywhere(it's publicly accessible).
- **static**: This means that the method can be run without creating an instance(object) of the class.
- **void**: This means the method does not return any value.
- **string[] args**: This is an array of Strings that allows command-line arguments to be passed to the program(though we don't use it in this simple example).
 3. System.out.println("Hello");
 - **System**: A built-in Java class that provides access to system resources.
  - **out**: This is an object of the printstream class, which is used for printing data to the console(standard output).
  - **This method prints the argument(in this case, the string "Hello") followed by a newline, meaning it moves the cursor to the next line after printing.
  - **"Hello"**: This is the string that will be printed to the console.

## Compilation & Execution of Java program
- Make sure you have the Java Development Kit(JDK) installed on your machine. You can download it from the [Oracle Website](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/)
- There are two main ways to compile and run Java programs:

a. **Compiling and running a Java program using CMD**
 * **Step 1** - Navigate to the directory containing your Java file.
 * **Step 2** - Compile your program, use the **javac** command followed by the filename(Command: javac HelloWorld.java).
 * **Step 3** - Run it with the **java** command(without the .class extension)(Command: java HelloWorld).

 **Output:** Hello, World!

b. **Compiling and running a Java program using an IDE**
- **Step 1** - Create new project.
- **Step 2** - Create a new Java class(inside your project).
- **Step 3** - In the newly created HelloWorld.java file. write your program.
- **Step 4** - Click the Run button to run your program.

**Output:** Hello, World!




```bash


 
 
